# Optimal Billiard Break (OBB)

This project stems from the course final of my university's Artificial Intelligence course. It is a practical application of a simple genetic algorithm, that uses collected data to determine the best location and spin of a breaking shot in billiards. 

## How do genetic algorithms work?

I primarily wanted to make this publically available for those unaware with genetic algorithms or how they work. I personally find them to be the most intuitive entry into thinking about artificial intelligence and simulated thinking. 

As the name would suggest, the process this algorithm follows is extremely similar to the theory of evolution and survival of the fittest. Essentially, we have bits of randomly generated information (cells) that are formed in particular groups (chromosomes). These chromosomes undergo a fitness function, which is some form of comparison (such an equation, using cell data) against other chromosomes. This cycle is repeated multiple times (generations), where only the strongest performing chromosomes survive and serve as the basis for creating new chromosomes for the following generation. This leads to theoretically higher performing chromosomes each generation.

## How can I use this program?

To run the program, simply have python available on your machine and run the following command:

> python path/to/directory/main.py

There is no config file, but all variables are clearly marked with this purpose at the top of main.py. Assuming you want to input your own data as opposed to the default test data collected by myself and friends, the data file is formatted as follows:

> [Location From Table Rail] [space] [Spin Of Cue Ball] [space] [Number of Pocketed Target Balls]
  
Where:
  - Location is measured in inches
  - Spin is managed as {(-1:backspin), (0:none), (1:topspin)}
  - Balls pocketed is written as {(-1:scratch), (0:none), (X:number of target balls in pockets)}

## Assumptions worth noting

If you know anything about billiards, you are probably thinking to yourself how outlandish of a project this may sound. After all, there are a lot of things this project seems to overlook- seemingly imperfect breaks, slight changes in angle/distance of the rack, how hard one hits the cue ball, friction generated by the cue tip, etc.

One neat characteristic of genetic algorithms is that they handle weeding out particular discremencies in data collection like this. It's not perfect, the more isolated and independent data the better, but it is more accomodating than other forms of analysis like this.

## Todo
  - Further update README
  - Fix issue where distance_range isn't properlly inherited by chromosomes
  - Read data from something nice, like .csv
  - Find data from professional billiards tournaments? I was unable to find any at time of completion of this project
